## JavaScript Variables

### Variables
Variables are like containers used to name and store data. The data can be accessed by referring to the name of the variable. Basically, we can store a piece of data and retrieve it whenever we want using variables.

#### Declaring a variable
To use a variable, it must be *declared* first. There are three methods for defining a variable. We can use the `let`, `const`, and `var` **keywords** to bring them into existence. The name of the variable is determined by you. Be sure to name it something descriptive, based on what kind of value it will hold. To start we will almost always use the `let` keyword to create our variables.

```js
let email;
```

Type the above into your console. What does it return? `undefined`.   Remember,`undefined` is a data **type** that means it doesn't have a value. When working in the console, which is a REPL, everything we type in there it will try to evaluate and produce a value, so when we define variables in the console, we will always see `undefined` as the output at first. 

Now reference it's value by typing 'email'. What do you see? Nothing! We have created the variable but not yet assigned any value to it.

**Keyword:** Special words reserved in JavaScript to denote specific behaviours.  Check out the [MDN Keyword List](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Reserved_Words) for reference.


#### Assigning a value to a variable
Assign a value to the variable with the `=` operator:

```js
let email;
email = "hello@email.com";
"hello@email.com"
```
*The value on the right hand side is stored in the variable on the left hand side.*

Now type `email` into your console again. The value has been assigned to `email` so now we can access it just by its name. 

Type:

```js
email
```

And you should see

```js
"hello@email.com"
```

Variables can also be declared and assigned a value in a single line of code:

```js
let email = "hello@email.com";
undefined
```

Why did the above example return undefined?   
No value is returned because `let email = "hello@email.com";` is not an expression, it's what we call a **statement**, so the REPL evaluated it and came up with `undefined`. 

**Statements** are similar to expressions, as they both give instructions to the computer but expressions *always* return a value, statements *don't always* return a value. Remember an **expression** would be something like `5+7`, it has a `return` value of `12`. 

It's best practice to declare variables using the keyword `let` and at the top of your code to avoid confusion. 

Once you have declared a variable with `var` `let` or `const` you don't need to keep using those keywords. We've already seen that referencing the variable name returns its value but you can also *reassign* a variable to another value without using the keywords `var` `let` or `const`. 

```js
let email = "hello@email.com";
email = "hi@email.com";
email;
```

What do you think `email` will return?

### const and var

Along with `let` we can use `const` and `var` to declare variables. `const` will created a variable that is READ ONLY, meaning you can not change the value of it once it is defined.

```js
const email = "sally@test.com";
email = "bryan@test.com";
```

This will throw an error `Uncaught TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.` We are unable to change the value that is stored in the `const`. This is a good thing, becasue we will have times that we create varaiables that should never change.

We can also use `var` to define varaibles, it is very similar to `let` however it is an older method for creating variables, and it is being phased out.

#### Variable naming conventions
* Variables can't contain spaces. Start with a non-numeric character (letter, _, or $) followed by any character. (e.g. `let 23people` is invalid)
* Use camelCase to separate words. (e.g. `let myName`)
* JavaScript is case sensitive so variable names are also case sensitive.
* Another convention is to use underscores to_separate_words. This is common in other programming languages (like PHP) but is generally avoided in JavaScript.
* When naming a variable, it's best to give it a descriptive name. (e.g. `let name` instead of `let n`)

Consider the following code: 

```js
const 8 = x;

```

The result will show an error when the syntax rules are not followed.

```js
Uncaught SyntaxError: Unexpected number
```

*Take a second to really think about this error, what can we start to decipher from it? We know that syntax is the grammar that we write our code in, and if we look at the line of code that throw this error we can start to see that `Unexpected number` might refer to the `8` we have there. When you encounter these types of errors, don't just give up and ask for help, read it a few times, think about what it says. Are you able to pick out the pieces that make sense?*

#### Using variables as values
After a variable is declared, it can be used as an *expression* in another  variable. In the example below, `years` is being reused in the `days` variable.

```js
const years = 25;
const days = years * 365;
```

#### Variable declarations

All variables should be declared *before* they are used. In some instances, JavaScript does not require this, but doing so makes the program easier to read.

##### Quotes
Single or double quotes can be used but pick one and be consistent.  Also, make sure that the closing quote matches the opening quote.  

##### Some common errors:
Have a look at the code below and see if you can spot the error. Then run the code and verify that you spotted an error. Fix the code and verify that it runs properly.

```js
const myName = "Homer";
myNme;
```

Now repeat the above steps with the following code:

```js
"JavaScript" + " is " + 20 + years old";
```

### Using const

<<<<<<< HEAD
For the most part in our JavaScript, we will be able to declare all our variables with `const`. When a case arises that forces us to use `let` we will *let* you know why! The reason we can use `const` for most every declaration is that for the most part we are not reassigning values very often. So we can make our variables "safer" by creating constant version of them. Reducing the possibility of them being overwritten.
=======
For the most part in our JavaScript, we will be able to declare all our variables with `const`. When a case arises that forces us to use `let` we will *let* you know why! The reason we can use `const` for most every declaration is that for the most part we are not reassigning values very often. So we can make our variables "safer" by creating constant version of them. Reducing the possibility of them being overwritten.

## Operators

You can do basic arithmetic with numbers using **operators**. Arithmetic operators in JavaScript are (`+`) for addition, (`-`) for subtraction, (`*`) for multiplication and (`/`) for division.

```js
55 * 20 

23.5 - 11

6 / 1.5

34 + 66.3
```

Parentheses can be used to group operations. Just like you learned in grade school, BEDMAS applies. The order in which the computer will do the math is:

**B**rackets   
**E**xponents  
**D**ivision  
**M**ultiplication  
**A**ddition  
**S**ubtraction 

```js
(2+1) * 5
```

This is how you use exponents in Javascript:
```js
2 ** 5
```


**Note:** When numbers are contained within quotes, they are considered **strings** and arithmetic operations cannot be performed.

```js
'2' + 2
'22'
```

What happens is JavaScript will convert the number `2` to be a string.


**Exercise**  
In pairs, solve the following questions by using **operators**. You can type all your equations into the Chrome developer tools console. 

**Hint:** When in the console, press the up arrow on your keyboard to bring back the last run line of code.

- how many hours are in a year? 
- how many minutes are in a decade? 
- how many seconds old are you? 


#### Concatenation
Unlike the other arithmetic operators, the `+` operator has another purpose other than adding numbers. It is the "addition" or joining of strings, known as **concatenation**. If you use the `+` operator with only numerical values, it will add the values. Otherwise, it will combine the outputs as a string.

You can concatenate variables, strings or a combination of both but strings must always be contained within quotes.

To join the three strings "Javascript", "is" and "awesome!" to get "JavaScript is awesome!" it would be:

```js
"Javascript " + "is" + " awesome!"
```

To join strings and variables, it would be:

```js
const language = "Javascript";
const sentence = language + " is awesome!";
sentence;
```
	
What happens when you type the below expressions in the console?

```js
'HackerYou' * 6 
```

```js	  
'HackerYou' + 6
``` 

```js
'HackerYou' * 'Class'
```

`NaN` (not a number) for first and third examples. We can't do some operations (like multiplication) with types that are not numbers.

**Note:** You can create strings by using either single or double quotes. For example, 'HackerYou' and "HackerYou" are equivalent. Pick one and stay consistent. 

**Exercises**  
What happens when you type in the console: `'She's a HackerYou student'`. 

SyntaxError! How would you solve this issue?(try googling it!)



### Whitespace
Whitespace refers to blank characters and includes spaces, tabs and line breaks. JavaScript usually ignores whitespace except when a *string* is being outputted into the browser.

Note how a single space is added to the strings in the concatenating examples above.

**Exercise**: In the statement `let email = "hello@email.com";`, which white spaces are optional and which are not?

## Template Literals

In ES6 there is a new way to define a string, and it comes with some added benefits. Currently if you want to define a string, you can use `''` or `""`. Basically just pick double or single quotes and stick with it.

```js
const name = "Ryan";
const job = "Instructor";
```

If you want to concatenate strings together you can use the `+` operator. 

```js
const name = "Ryan";
const job = "Instructor";
const sentence = name + " works at HackerYou as an " + job;
console.log(sentence);// "Ryan works at HackerYou as an Instructor"
```

To create a template literal string, we use the backtick `` ` `` in place of the quotes. 

```js
const name = `Ryan`;
const job = `Instructor`;
```

They behave exactly the same, but there is one difference. With a template literal, concatenation becomes a lot easier. 

```js
const name = `Ryan`;
const job = `Instructor`;
const sentence = `${name} works at HackerYou as an ${job}`;
console.log(sentence);// "Ryan works at HackerYou as an Instructor"
```

Notice the `${}` syntax inside of the string, this is a template expression. It allows us to template out our strings, and the browser will replace the `${}` expression with the proper value at runtime. This makes concatenating large strings a lot more enjoyable.

#### Multi line

One last thing to look at is how template literals handle multi line string. With a regular string if you wanted to have to span more than one line, you would have to do something like this.

```js
const multi = "This is a \n multiline string";
console.log(multi);
```
We have to include the `\n` new line character. If you tried to put that on two lines:

```js
const multi = "This is a \n 
multiline string";
console.log(multi);
```

It would throw an error `Uncaught SyntaxError: Unexpected token ILLEGAL`. However with template literals we CAN do that!!

```js
const multi = `This is a 
multiline string`;
console.log(multi);
```

So nice!!

To learn more check out this <a href="https://youtu.be/LTbnmiXWs2k?list=PL57atfCFqj2h5fpdZD-doGEIs0NZxeJTX">video</a> on `let` and `const` and template literals.
>>>>>>> ca8b4c87a162b088ffe7b607986fb2a124490505
