## Functions

Just to recap, we said that functions are chunks of code that can be run at any point in time. Functions are arguably the most important and powerful concept in any programming language but this is especially true for JavaScript, where, as we'll see, functions can be passed around like any other value.

So far we have looked at built-in functions but now it's time to learn how to create your own. 

A function is best used to reduce verbosity in your code. Why write a set of commands multiple times when you can create a function to do the work for you? Repeat less code!

#### Defining Functions

A function is `defined` by giving it a name and the code you would like it to execute, and then `called` by referencing the name at a later point in the code. To define a function, we use the `function` keyword followed by the name of the function. The syntax looks like this:

```js
function nameOfFunction() {
  // block of statements to execute
}
```

**Example**:

```js
function helloWorld() {
  console.log("Hello there!");
}
```
This way of defining a function is called a [function declaration](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/function). There are other ways to define function. For example, like this:

```js
const helloWorld = function() {
	console.log("Hello there");
};
```
This second method of defining a function is referred to as a [function expression](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/function). Using one or the other is usually a matter of personal preference, and for our purposes at this point they are exactly the same. 

#### Calling Functions
We call the function by typing its name, followed by round parentheses. Note that your function will never run if you don't call it!

```js
helloWorld();
"Hello there!"
```

**Exercise:** Write a function called `sayMyName` that will `alert` your name, then call it.

#### Parameters

Functions can do much more than execute the same code over and over. This is where **parameters** come in. Parameters are the comma-separated list of variables that serve as placeholders for the values we can pass to the function (i.e. arguments).

```js
function nameOfFunction(parameter1, parameter2) {
  // block of statements to execute
}
```
Here is the same thing, but defined as a function expression:
```js
const nameOfFunction = function(parameter1,parameter2) {
	//block
};
```

Using these parameters, you can define a function that will `return` a result based on the arguments passed.

**Example**:

```js
const add = function(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

const result = add(2, 4);

console.log(result) // 6
```

So first we *define* a function called "add" that takes the parameters `a` and `b` and returns their sum. Then we declare variable in which we *call* the function and *pass* it the *values* `2` and `4` as *arguments*. Inside the function, `a` refers to the value `2` and `b` refers to the value `4`. The variable "result" stores the *return* of the function - the value `6` - which we then console log.

**Exercise:** Edit your `sayMyName` function to accept one parameter called `name`, then call it. It should alert out the name that was passed in as an argument. 

#### Return vs. print

A function can print / log values to the console with `console.log()`. Don't confuse this with `return`. Returning a value is useful if you want to store this value and reuse it.

For example, the following function prints a value to the console.

```js
const add = function(a,b) {
  console.log(a+b);
}
```

If we try to store the result of the function we see that our variable stored nothing; the value is undefined.

```js
const num = add(1,2);
num; //undefined
```

If we use the `return` statement, we can make the function a lot more useful.

```js
const add = function(a,b) {
  return a+b;
}
```

```js
const num = add(1,2);
num; //3
```

Arrow functions are a newer syntax for creating functions (created in ES6). Arrow functions are not going to replace the `function() {}` we know and love, but we will be seeing them more and more. This is the basic arrow function syntax:

```js
const add = (a,b) => {
  return a + b;
};
```

The core part of the syntax is the lack of the `function` keyword when defining a new function. Instead, we have the `=>` or fat arrow. There are actually a few ways you can define the arrow function.

For example, if the function simply returns and there is nothing else in the function body, we can remove the `{}` around it and make it one line and remove the `return` keyword.

```js
const add = (a,b) => a + b;

// The above is the same as:
const add = (a,b) => {
  return a + b;
};

// Which is also the same as:
const add = function(a,b) {
  return a + b;
};
```

OR HERE'S ANOTHER NOTES OPTION:

```js
const add = (a,b) => a + b;
```
The above is the same as:
```js
const add = (a,b) => {
  return a + b;
};
```
Which is also the same as:
```js
const add = function(a,b) {
  return a + b;
};
```



If the function only has one parameter you can actually leave the `()` off  as well.

```js
const add5 = a => a + 5;
```

If there are no parameters, you will have to include all the parentheses.

```js
const eight = () => 3 + 5;
```

**Exercise**: How can we use the `add()` function to add three numbers together?

Try to think of a way to do this without changing the definition of the function.

**Terminology Recap**:

- Define: to create a function
- Parameter: a variable (placeholder) for the arguments when defining a function
- Argument: a value provided to a function
- Pass: to provide arguments to a function
- Call: ask JavaScript to evaluate a function
- Return: pass back a value

#### Exercises
Complete the functions exercises in <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/functions.html" class="exercise" download>**functions.html**</a>

The solutions are available <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/functions-ANSWER.html" class="exercise" download>**here**</a>
