<<<<<<< HEAD
## AJAX
=======
## Ajax

>>>>>>> ca8b4c87a162b088ffe7b607986fb2a124490505
So far we've figured out how to get data from an API by visiting URLs in our browser, but what if we want to work with the data inside our own website or app?

This is where AJAX comes in.  AJAX, which stands for **Asynchronous JavaScript and XML**, allows us to send and receive data *asynchronously* (without having to refresh the page). 

AJAX is used all over the web to help provide continuous user experiences. Infinite scroll, like how witter loads more tweets when you get to the bottom of the page, is using AJAX. Same with auto-completing search suggestions in Google, or new comments appearing instantaneously on a Facebook post.

#### AJAX and APIs

We can also use AJAX to asynchronously request data from an API in our own apps. Our JavaScript can "talk" to an external server, get some data, and update the current page without a browser refresh.

Take a look at the <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/weather-app-answer.html" download>weather-app-answer.html</a> we'll be building to see this in action.  Our weather app requests data from the Wunderground API and displays it on the page in our desired format.

**Unfortunate sidenote:** AJAX got named a long time ago when XML was popular. Don't worry, it still works with JSON! That's what we'll be using.


#### $.ajax with jQuery

AJAX has a few cross-browser quirks, so we'll work with jQuery's `$.ajax()` method to handle our requests. There are many ways to perform requests of this type, thankfully jQuery has made a nice method for us to use!

[Looking at the documentation](https://api.jquery.com/jQuery.ajax/), the `$.ajax()` method requires us to specify the URL we're requesting from, and provide an optional settings object. Or you can pass *everything* in the settings object. The second option is preferred because it's easier to read and less error prone.

The AJAX method takes care of the getting the information we're requesting, and once we have it, we need to specify what to do with that information. We can chain a `.then()` method onto the object that specifies what to do with that information when we get it.

Let's try this with the TTC API. 

`http://myttc.ca/finch_station.json` becomes:

```js
$.ajax({
  url: 'http://myttc.ca/finch_station.json',
  method: 'GET',
  dataType: 'json'
}).then(function() {
  console.log('It worked!');
});
```

Open up <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/first-ajax-request.html" download>first-ajax-request.html</a> to give it a try.

The result in the console should be an error:

`Origin http://myttc.ca/ is not allowed by Access-Control-Allow-Origin.`

If you search "Access-Control-Allow-Origin" in Google you'll see that the first result points to an MDN page talking about **Cross-site HTTP requests**. When making an HTTP request to a domain name that is different from the domain name that we are currently using, we are creating cross-site HTTP requests. Most servers will not allow this for security reasons.

Unfortunately AJAX is restricted by the "same origin policy", meaning that these types of requests can only happen from the same domain/subdomain. 

#### JSONP

One way of getting around the "same origin policy" is to use *JSON with padding* (JSONP). JSONP is a popular technique which requires the server you're requesting data from to cooperate with you and send you JavaScript instead of JSON data. Requesting JavaScript from another domain is permitted and we do it all of the time (think loading jQuery from Google's CDN). Note that a server has to be set up for JSONP for us to be able to receive it. If the server's not set up for it, there are other ways around this which we will talk about later.

What jQuery can do is inject a script tag into your website temporarily when a request is made. The script `src` will point to a bit of JavaScript on the server you requested data from. What the server needs to do is wrap the JSON data in a JavaScript function (thus "padding"). This function becomes available to us, it gets executed, we get our data, and the script tag is removed.

#### CORS

Another technique to get around the "same origin policy" is called CORS which stands for *Cross-Origin Resource Sharing*. This is a new protocol which is simply an "opt out" of the same origin policy. The server that has the data would need to tell the browser that it's opting out. Unfortunately the TTC API doesn't use CORS.

#### What if that still doesn't work?

Sometimes you might get into a situation where JSONP doesn't fix it. In that case we have to use a proxy server to get the AJAX request to work. Browser to server communication is sometimes blocked via CORS but server to server communication is more open. We have a proxy server you can use here [https://github.com/hackeryou/json-proxy](https://github.com/hackeryou/json-proxy) for situations like that!

Let's modify our previous request and just change `json` to `jsonp`.

```js
$.ajax({
  url: 'http://myttc.ca/finch_station.json',
  method: 'GET',
  dataType: 'jsonp'
}).then(function() {
  console.log('It worked!');
});
```

Preview the result in <a hef="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/first-ajax-request-fixed.html" download>first-ajax-request-fixed.html</a>

It should work, you'll see `It worked!` in the console. But where's the data? It's available, we just have to access it. Remember the `.then()` method?

The `.ajax()` method retrieves the information and upon the completion of the request, we pass it into the `.then()` method that handles our next steps.

[https://api.jquery.com/deferred.then/](https://api.jquery.com/deferred.then/)

The important part here is the fact that the `.then()` method accepts three arguments: what to do when the request is successful, what to do when there is an error, and if we are tracking the progress of the request. (At this point, we only need the first argument.)

The first argument we pass in is a function. The second is an argument that represents the returned data. This is what is known as a [*callback function*](https://notes.hackeryou.com/lesson/59237d393de2047c06531b20/5ac38e019f86d2f20b0e6474). We previously used callback functions in event handlers.

```js
$.ajax({
  url: 'http://myttc.ca/finch_station.json',
  method: 'GET',
  dataType: 'jsonp'
}).then(function(res) {
  console.log(res);
});
```

Check out <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/ajax-response.html" download>ajax-response.html</a>  and open your console. You should see the response data there as an object.

#### Working with JSON

When we passed information to the `.then()` method, we used a function to say what we would do with that information. In that function, we set a parameter that would take the supplied information and give it a name to be used later. We then logged that parameter name to the console.

In the console, clicking on the little arrow on the side will open up the object for inspection. jQuery has *parsed* (read and converted) the JSON into a JavaScript object so we can access it using JavaScript.

You can work with the data just like you would with a regular object. We can use the parameter name we supplied as the reference name of the object.

`response.lat` gives you the latitude of the stop.

`response.vehicles` gives us an array of all the vehicles near the stop.

And now we can do all the usual JavaScript and jQuery things with the data, like store the values in a variable:

```js
let closestVehicle = response.vehicles[0].distance;
```

and update the DOM:

```js
$('p.distance').html(closestVehicle + "m");
```


#### Exercise

Get some practice debugging and working with `$.ajax()` in <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/ajax-practice.html" class="exercise" download>**ajax-practice.html**</a>.<br> Solution is <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/ajax-practice-answer.html" download>here</a>.