<<<<<<< HEAD
JavaScript Organization 
=======
## Javascript Organization

>>>>>>> ca8b4c87a162b088ffe7b607986fb2a124490505
#### Problem 1: 'Spaghetti Code'

As you add more lines and functionality to your JS code, it can start to get a little unruly. You might have trouble tracking down which lines do what, or end up having a hard time changing or adding new features. If you ever find yourself in an unorganized tangle, you've probably stumbled upon (or written!) what we call spaghetti code. Don't panic! A little code organization can help you steer clear of these issues.

#### Problem 2: Conflicting Code

Another reason to organize your code is to avoid conflicts with other plugins or libraries that you're running on your website. Say you create a variable to hold your twitter handle for your contact page, but you're also embedding a twitter widget on your website. You might end up with something like this:

```js
let twitter = 'http://twitter.com'; //created by the widget
/* ... lots of other code ... */
let twitter = '@thisishackeryou'; //created by you
```

Since variables can be re-assigned in JavaScript, we've gone ahead and over-written the widget's variable and most likely broken it!  Again, we can fix this through better organization.


### Scope
In our sample conflict above, we're running into what's called a scope issue. 

Variables declared outside of a function are part of the **global** scope. This means they can be accessed (and over-written!) from *anywhere* in your code.

On the other hand, variables declared inside a function have **local** scope. This means they're only available to other code *inside the function*

#### Examples

The global variable `planet` is accessible within the function.

```js
let planet = "Earth";

function whereAmI(){
  console.log(planet);
}

whereAmI(); //logs "Earth"
```

The locally scoped `planet` variable overrides the global one.

```js
let planet = "Earth";

function whereAmI(){
  let planet = "Mars";
  console.log(planet);
}

whereAmI(); //logs "Mars"
```

The `destination` variable is locally scoped to the `chooseDestination` function and unavailable in the `launchRocket` function's scope.

```js
function chooseDestination(){
  let destination = "The Moon"
}

function launchRocket(){
  console.log(destination);
}

chooseDestination();
launchRocket(); // gives us an error
```

### Organizing Your Code With an Object

To avoid scope issues and help break your code down into more modular components, we can organize our code using an object. 

We start with an empty object that will hold all our our application code.

```js
const myApp = {};
```

This creates what's called a **namespace** for our code. All your variables and functions will start with the `myApp` namespace, protecting them from conflicts with other code. 

We can now add our twitter variable as a property on the myApp object.

```js
myApp.twitter = 'thisishackeryou';
```

We can store entire functions in our app object the same way.

```js
myApp.getTweets = function(){
  //code to retrieve tweets
};
```

We can call this function elsewhere in the app with:

```js
myApp.getTweets();
```

You can add as many variables and functions as you need to keep your code organized into small pieces!

```js
const myApp = {};

myApp.twitterHandle = 'thisishackeryou';
myApp.numberOfTweets = 3;
myApp.includeRetweets = false;

myApp.getTweets = function(){
  //retrieves tweets
}

myApp.displayTweets = function(){
  //prints tweets onto the page
}
```

#### Terminology Reminder
Variables are often referred to as **properties** when stored inside an object.

Functions are often referred to as **methods** when stored inside an object.


### The Init Function

Most apps will have a special method called `init` that kicks things off. Anything that needs to happen on page load, and most event handlers go in here. It's also a good place to cache jQuery selectors.

**The name `init` is just a name. You can name the method whatever you'd like,`init` is simply used as a short form for initialize as what we are doing is initializing our application.**

```js
const widgetApp = {};

widgetApp.init = function(){
  widgetApp.widgetContainer = $('#widget');
  widgetApp.widgetContainer.addClass('active');
  
  $('a.close').on('click', function(){
    widgetApp.widgetContainer.hide();
  });
}
```

We then call the init function inside a jQuery DOM ready so that it executes on page load.

```js
$(function(){
  widgetApp.init();
});
```

Why only put the `widgetApp.init()` method in the document ready? Well if we put all our code inside of the ready function.

```js
$(function() {
	const widgetApp = {};
	...
	widgetApp.init();
});
```

We would never be able to access the `widgetApp` object from out devtools because it would be scoped to the anonymous handler for the ready event!

Exposing it before the document ready allows us to play around with the object in the console.

### Practice

<<<<<<< HEAD
To get some experience into how an application could be organized into an object, download <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/foodAhoy.html" download>foodAhoy.html</a> Together we'll refactor this code to show how the namespacing pattern can be applied to an app that already exists.
=======
To get some experience into how an application could be organized into an object, download <a href="https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/foodAhoy.html" download>foodAhoy.html</a> Together we'll refactor this code to show how the namespacing pattern can be applied to an app that already exists.
>>>>>>> ca8b4c87a162b088ffe7b607986fb2a124490505
