# Command line

As developers, we write in many different languages and have lots of exciting products at our disposal. One of the most powerful tools in our arsenal is tucked away inside the system folder on our computer. It's the low-level interface of our computers which we call the _command line_, and it can greatly improve our workflow.

## Why should a front end developer learn to use the command line?

Front end developers in particular and computer users in general often use visual tools (sometimes called a _graphical user interface_ or GUI - pronounced "gooey") to perform lower-level programming tasks. This makes plenty of sense: if we need to change the color of a button, it's easier to pick a color from a drop-down than it is to create a CSS file, link it, and write a declaration with a hex code. Often, the actions we can perform are limited due to the design of the tool. 

A GUI takes a command from us and tells the computer to it. The command line is us telling our computers to run a command witout the GUI in the middle. If the GUI is the barista and the command is our coffee order, the command line is a way for our to make our coffees ourselves. Writing in the command line gives us full control over our system and unlocks super powers for our projects.

## Opening the command line

To open the command line, we can either use the pre-installed command line tool on Windows and Mac, or we can install our own (which allows for even more control over our computers).

* **For Windows:** Click the 'Start' button, choose 'All Programs', navigate to 'Accessories' and choose the 'Command Prompt' application.
    
    If you need to be an administrator, right click the 'Command Prompt' application and choose 'Run as admin'.
    
    For more control over your command line, we recommend you install [cmder](http://cmder.net/).

  If you have Windows 10 you can also install the [Ubuntu Bash](http://www.howtogeek.com/249966/how-to-install-and-use-the-linux-bash-shell-on-windows-10/)

* **For Mac:** Open the 'Applications' folder, navigate to the 'Utilities' directory and open the Terminal application.

    For more control over your command line, we recommend you install [iTerm2](http://iterm2.com/).

### Fun fact corner

The name `bash` is a joke because it's a [shell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_(computing)) based on an [older shell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bourne_shell) written by a person named Stephen Bourne. This **new** shell is a Bo(u)rn(e) Again SHell a.k.a. BASH a.k.a. bash. (This is why memes caught on so fast: low bar for internet humor.)

## Common command line commands

command | what it does
---: | ---
`pwd` | prints the working directory (i.e. the folder you are inside)
`ls` | lists every file and folder inside your working directory
`cd` | changes directories (followed by the directory name)
`mkdir` | makes a new directory (followed by the directory name)
`rm -r` | deletes a directory and everything inside (followed by the directory name)
`touch` | makes a new file (followed by the file name)
`rm` | deletes a file (followed by the file name)
`:q` | gets you out of the Vim editor
`mv` | moves a file or directory into a specified file or directory ( followed by the thing to move and the place to move it to) 
`cp` | copies a file (followed by the file to copy and what you want to name the copy)
`cp -r`| copies a folder (followed by the name of the folder to copy and what you want to name the copy)
`clear` | clears your terminal window
<!-- `rm -rf` | removes a directory  -->

Somewhere on the internet you might see someone telling you to delete your files like this: `rm -rf`. That command deletes everything in the directory following that command without any `Are you sure you want to delete this?` prompts. You will probably be fine with `rm -r`.

If you'd like to practice these commands, follow the directions in this [command line exercise](https://hychalknotes.s3.amazonaws.com/command-line-dolly.md).