## Javascript Comments

### Comments
Sometimes you want to write notes to yourself (or others) to organize blocks of code or leave explanations. Just like HTML & CSS, JavaScript will ignore comments and not execute them.

Single line comments can be added with `//`.

```js
// There are 365 days in a year.
```

Just like in CSS,  `/*  */` are used for multiline comments.

```js
/* 
	Many 
	Lines
	wow
*/
```

Multi-line comments are also great for "hiding" large blocks of code so you can try something new without erasing your old code.

Comments are a good thing to get used to using. Comments help you understand your code weeks or months down the road. They also allow you to make your code readable and easy to understand for other developers. 
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======


## Debugging Javascript

### Debugging Tools In JavaScript

**Functions** are used to make the code do things. They're basically chunks of code/instructions that can be repeated and run any time. We can create our own functions (to be discussed later) but there are many handy ones already built into JavaScript for debugging purposes. 

To get the function to execute, you have to *call the function* using the function name followed by parentheses. Some times this is also referred to as running or executing a function. 

**Calling a function:** 

```js
functionName();
```

When calling a function, often (but not always), you need to *pass* some data into the function. This data is called an **argument**. You can pass more than one piece of data at a time! 

**Calling a function with an argument:** 

```js
functionName(argument);
```

Let's take a closer look at some terminology:  

- **Argument:** a value provided to a function
- **Pass:** to provide arguments to a function
- **Call:** ask JavaScript to evaluate/execute a function
- **Return:** pass back the value from the function

A few built-in JavaScript functions that we will use are `prompt()`, `alert()` and `confirm()`. All three display a dialog box containing a message but `prompt()` also allows the user to input some text and `confirm()` also includes "cancel" and "ok" buttons.

These built-in functions aren't always pretty but they can be really useful tools to help debug our code as we learn JavaScript. 

Let's try calling these functions in the browser console with and without arguments and see what happens, one function at a time.
	
**Without arguments**
```js
prompt();
alert();	
confirm();
```

**With arguments**  
Note that the arguments are contained in quotes.
```js
prompt("What is your name?");
alert("hello");
confirm("yay or nay?");
```

In the example above, the *values* "What's your name?", "hello" and "yay or nay" are *passed* as *arguments* to the functions named `prompt` and `alert`. We *called* the function and it *returned* different values for each function.

`prompt()`:

* when the user clicks OK, the text entered in the input field is returned
* if the user clicks OK without entering any text, an empty string is returned
* if the user clicks the Cancel button, the function returns `null` (means "value of nothing")

`alert()`:

* the *argument* shows in the dialog (The text written in the parenthesis)
* returns an `undefined` value (means "does not have a value"")

`confirm()`:

* returns `true` if "ok" was selected
* `false` if "cancel" was selected

Note that the arguments being passed and some of the values being returned were contained within quotes. That's because different values have different **types**. Let's go over the different types of values that were returned.


#### console.log()

Likely the debugging tool that you'll be using the most is `console.log()` which is a function you can use any time you want to print (display) something in the console. You can use this any time you are unsure of what the value of a variable is, or when you want to check that one of your functions is working properly! 

```js
// log out a string
console.log('oh joy of joys my event listener is firing');

// log out a variable
console.log(myVar);

// log out multiple variables 
console.log(raphael, donatello, michelangelo, leonardo);

// evaluate expressions
console.log(total*tax);

```

Whenever you want to check the status of something in your code, use `console.log`! It's best practice to use them in development and remove console logs from your projects when they are ready for deployment. 

>>>>>>> ca8b4c87a162b088ffe7b607986fb2a124490505
